Add documentation for new codec (#2467)
trufflesuite/truffle: packages/codec/README.md

# Truffle Decoder

This module provides interfaces for decoding contract state, transaction
calldata, and events.

It's split into three classes: The wire decoder, the contract decoder, and the
contract instance decoder.  The wire decoder is associated to the project as a
whole and decodes transaction calldata and events.  The contract decoder is
associated to a specific contract class.  It has all the capabilities of the
wire decoder, but in addition it acts as a factory for contract instance
decoders.  The contract instance decoder is associated to a specific contract
instance; it too has all the capabilities of the wire decoder, but it can also
decode the state variables for the specific instance.  (In addition, in the case
that the contract does not include a `deployedBytecode` field in its artifact,
which can hinder decoding certain things, the contract instance decoder can

> sometimes work around this where the other decoders cannot.)

Author: Not sure there's really enough here for a table.  Also remember that, per your suggestion, the contract decoder doesn't actually decode things but rather just acts as a factory for contract instance decoders.  (Well, OK, it retains the wire decoder functions, but it doesn't add any new *decoding* functions, only factory stuff).

Instead of that, how about I just add some usage examples?  And then people can see the API docs for more.

> sometimes work around this where the other decoders cannot.)

Reviewer: Tentatively I'm into that, but I'll have to see it. I'm just thinking to make the start of this document be as high-signal upfront as possible, and a table/list seemed like a way to achieve that.

> sometimes work around this where the other decoders cannot.)

Reviewer: (captured this as note for follow-up issue)

This documentation describes the current state of the decoder, but you should
expect to see improvements soon.  Note that most of the documentation is not

> found in this README, but rather in this package's TypeDoc.  However, this

Author: > (with "API documentation" being a link)

How would I do that?  Wouldn't we need to know the URL in advance?

> Also, TypeDoc renders README.md by default, so people will probably read this document for the first time while already looking at the TypeDoc. It might be worth keeping a separate TypeDoc README

How would that work?

> found in this README, but rather in this package's TypeDoc.  However, this

Reviewer: Re: link inside repo README: you're right, let's solve this one later.

Re: separate README: see TypeDoc docs. It's probably a config/CLI option.

> found in this README, but rather in this package's TypeDoc.  However, this

Reviewer: (captured this as note for follow-up issue)

README describes the overall approach.

## Usage

### Initialization

Create a decoder with one of the methods `forProject`, `forContract`,
`forContractWithDecoder`, or `forContractInstance`.  See the documentation of

> these methods for details.

Author: Again question about how to make hyperlinks work in this context.

> these methods for details.

Reviewer: Unless we move this to the TypeDoc-specific README, we can hold off on this for now (although we should keep a list for when we know the URLs)

### Methods

See the documentation for the individual decoder classes for a method listing.

### Decoding modes and abification

The decoder can operate in either of two modes: Full mode or ABI mode.  In ABI
mode, it decodes purely based on the information in the ABI.  In full mode, it
uses Solidity AST information to provide a more detailed decoding.  Due to
various technical reasons, full mode is not always reliably available.  The only
way to guarantee the use of full mode is if all your contracts are written in
Solidity and they were all compiled simultaneously.

The decoder will always run in full mode when possible, but sometimes the
necessary information may be missing or, for technical reasons, unusable.  In
this case, it will fall back into ABI mode.  Decodings are always marked with
which mode produced them so you can distinguish, as the format of a result may
differ substantially due to which mode was used.

If you want to simplify matters and to not have to deal with this distinction,

> the decoder provides methods for converting a given decoding to ABI mode.  So

Author: > Probably link to the methods and list them by name for at-a-glance awareness.

Same question.

> Side question: what distinction do you make between "function" and "method"?

Uhhhh none.  Purely a matter of what word I felt like using.  Should I consistify that?

> the decoder provides methods for converting a given decoding to ABI mode.  So

Reviewer: Methods/functions: The distinction I [try to] make is that methods belong to classes, functions do not.

I'd say yes; it's worth consistifying.

you can run the decoder in whatever mode it runs in, then run the result through
these functions to ensure you get an ABI mode result.  As noted above, there's
no way to ensure you get a full mode result.

(There are two slight differences between running the decoder in full mode and
abifying afterward, versus simply running the decoder in ABI mode.  Firstly,
full mode will reject certain invalid decodings that ABI mode cannot recognize
as invalid.  Secondly, the abified version of a full-mode decoding does contain
slightly more information than an actual ABI-mode decoding, just in an
ABI-mode-compatible format.)

Note that modes are always applied at the level of the whole decoding; different
variables in the same decoding will always be decoded with the same mode.
However, if an object (such as a log) admits *multiple* decodings, these
different decodings may occur in different modes.

Note that decoding of state variables is only available in full mode; attempting
to decode state variables will result in an exception if full mode is not
possible.

### Output format: `Type`s and `Result`s

This will be a brief explanation of the format of decoded variables.  For full

> detail, I recommend seeing the documentation for `Format`.

Author: Same question about link.

> Each decoded value is a `Result`.  A `Result` has the following fields:

Author: Same question.

> 1. `type`: This is a `Type` object describing the value's type.  Each `Type`

Author: Same question.

has a `typeClass` field describing the overall broad type, such as `"uint"` or
`"bytes"`, together with additional information that gives the specific type.  I

> won't go into further detail about these here; I recommend simply looking at

Reviewer: (first person)

`Format.Types` to see how these work.

> 2. `kind`: This is either `"value"`, in which case the `Result` is a `Value`, or

Author: Same question.

> `"error"`, in which case the `Result` is an `ErrorResult`.  In the former case,

Author: Same question.

there will be a `value` field containing the decoded value.  In the latter case,
there will be an `error` field indicating what went wrong.  *Warning*: When
decoding a complex type, such as an array, mapping, or array, getting a kind of
`"value"` does not necessarily mean the individual elements were decoded
successfully.  Even if the `Result` for the array (mapping, struct) as a whole
has kind "value"`, the elements might still have kind `"error"`.

3. `value`: As mentioned, this is included when `kind` is equal to `"value"`.
It contains information about the actual decoded value.  I recommend seeing

> `Format.Values` for more information.

Author: Same question.

4. `error`: The alternative to `value`.  Generally includes information about

> the raw data that led to the error.  See `Format.Errors` for more

Reviewer: link

Author: Same question.

information.

> 5. `reference`: This field is a debugger-only feature so I'll skip explaining it

Reviewer: (first person)

here; it won't come up when using this interface.
 

> Rather than explain the format in detail -- you can see the TypeDoc for that -- I'd

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rather than explain the format in detail -- you can see the API documentation for that -- I'd
```

Reviewer: also first person

instead like to take a moment to answer the question: What counts as a value,

> and what counts as an error?

Reviewer: This paragraph maybe can just be replaced (or preceded by) a heading "Values vs. Errors"

Author: Hm, a subheading maybe.  Would need to find a way to make it flow.

In general, the answer is that anything that can be generated via Solidity
alone (i.e. no assembly), with correctly-encoded inputs, and without making use
of compiler bugs, is a value, not an error.  That means that, for instance, the
following things are values, not errors:

1. A variable of contract type whose address does not actually hold a contract
of that type;

2. An external function pointer that does not correspond to a valid function;

> 3. A string containing invalid UTF-8;

Reviewer: This list should be unordered, yes?

Author: Yes, I suppose so.

etc.

By contrast, the following *are* errors:

1. A `bool` which is neither `false` (0) nor `true` (1);

> 2. An `enum` which is out of range;

Reviewer: (same with this list)

Author: Indeed, the ordering has no particular meaning.

etc.

(You may be wondering about the enum case here, because if you go sufficiently
far back, to Solidity 0.4.4 or earlier, it *was* possible to generate
out-of-range enums without resorting to assembly or compiler bugs.  However, the

> decoder is not intended to support Solidity older than 0.4.9 (except in ABI-only

Reviewer: It might be worth putting something closer to the top that says what Solidity versions we support

Author: Probably the place to put it would be the discussion of decoding modes -- mention that full mode is only supported for 0.4.9 and later.

Reviewer: That makes sense; I'm just looking from the perspective that we will have three kinds of readers:
1. People that just want to get started quickly using the decoder
2. People that want to read the README first
3. People that have previously read the README and need to remember some detail

I am specifically thinking of (3) here.
